Laptop guide (#116)
UWindsorCSS/wiki: resources/guides/laptop_guide.md

---
id: laptop_guide
title: Laptop Requirements Guide
sidebar_label: Laptop Requirements Guide
slug: /guides/laptop
---

_Last updated on 2022/08/24_

Here are a few things to keep in mind when purchasing/configuring your laptop:

## Hardware

Although the following specifications are not strictly required, having these minimum specifications will make your computer less frustrating to use:

-   8 GB of RAM
    -   for gaming/future-proof purposes, 12 or 16 GB is more preferable
-   256 GB of SSD storage

>     -   UWindsor provides 1 TB OneDrive cloud storage. However, if you download a lot of games and software, or if you simply prefer more local storage, you should upgrade to 512 GB / 1 TB storage

Reviewer: I would honestly bump this up to 512GB. Even though we do get 1TB OneDrive for free, it's a massive pain to work with unless you have hot files saved to device all the time anyway. Not to mention, at this point half-TB SSDs are quite common.

Reviewer 2: I would just give a bit more info. 256 is fine as an absolute minimum (source: my laptop has 256gb). But I would add a clause that it's strongly recommended to up to 512gb

## Operating System

You aren't required to have certain OS since the School of Computer Science has remote Linux server that you can connect to, but here are a few pros and cons to help you decide which OS to use:

### Windows

Windows is one of the most popular OS among students, particularly because it comes with most pre-assembled laptops. The user interface should be fairly intuitive even when you are new to using laptops, and it is one of the most supported OS for app availability or IT support. Additionally, it is much easier to game on Windows.

> Many Computer Science classes (COMP-1400 and COMP-1410, for example) will require programming environments that are harder to set up in Windows than in other UNIX/Linux-based OS. Although substitutes like WSL and virtual machines can help, they may not be fully compatible or require a lot of computing power. Should you choose Windows as your primary OS, you should consider setting up an SSH connection to the UWindsor's remote server on editors like Visual Studio Code or via other means. In addition, when you are working with other developers on a project, you may also have to pay attention to your line breaks (CRLF vs. LF).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many Computer Science classes (COMP-1400 and COMP-1410, for example) will require programming environments that are harder to set up in Windows than in other UNIX/Linux-based OS. Although substitutes like WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) and VMs (virtual machines) can help, they can require a lot of computing power (VMs especially). Should you choose Windows as your primary OS, you should consider setting up an SSH connection to the UWindsor's remote server on editors like Visual Studio Code or via other means. In addition, when you are working with other developers on a project, you may also have to pay attention to your line breaks (CRLF vs. LF).
```

Its not true that WSL or VMs have compatibility issues, at least insofar as coursework is concerned. In both cases, you're essentially running a guest Linux distro which behaves near-identical to a real system.

Reviewer: Also, I believe we have an article for setting up WSL and connecting to CS servers with SSH in VS Code. We should link that here (and if we don't, we definitely need to create them)

Reviewer 2: WSL does have some compatibility issues with some of the courses (256 and 330) however virtual machines should not have any compatibility issues.

If you are taking classes offered by other faculties or departments (e.g. Engineering), you may have to install software that are only available on Windows. However, this usually is not a concern since such instances are quite rare, and the University of Windsor has many other computer resources to help you out if something like this happens.

### Linux

> Linux/UNIX is very good for programming/developing because of how easy it is to set up the necessary environment. Much like MacOS, it can be difficult to game on. Depending on how important gaming is to you, you may need to use Wine, set up virtual machine, or dual-boot with Windows. Additionally, since many of the University's software (Office 365, OneDrive, Teams, etc.) are on the Microsoft platform, there _may_ be some compatibility issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linux/UNIX is very good for programming/developing because of how easy it is to set up the necessary environment. Much like MacOS, it can be difficult to game on. Depending on how important gaming is to you, you may need to use Wine, set up a virtual machine, or dual-boot with Windows. Additionally, since many of the University's software (Office 365, OneDrive, Teams, etc.) are on the Microsoft platform, there _may_ be some compatibility issues.
```

> Popular Linux distros include Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora, Pop!\_OS, Linux Mint, and Arch Linux. If you are very new to Linux, then Ubuntu and Debian may be a good starting point for you simply because there is a large community using them and most likely have answers for any problem you encounter. The University, for example, uses Debian on its remote servers. If you have time and are willing to experiment, you should test out the different Linux OS since the desktop environment on Ubuntu and Debian (GNOME) can be slightly laggy on laptops without high specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Popular Linux distros include Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora, Pop!\_OS, Linux Mint, and Arch Linux. If you are very new to Linux, then Ubuntu and Debian may be a good starting point for you simply because there is a large community using them and most likely have answers for any problem you encounter. The University, for example, uses Debian on its remote servers. If you have time and are willing to experiment, you should test out the different Linux OS since the desktop environment on Ubuntu and Debian (GNOME) can be slightly laggy on laptops without high specifications. If you are coming from Windows, Linux Mint's Cinnamon desktop environment will help you adjust to Linux as it has a look and feel comparable to that of Windows.
```

> Although Linux OS may be confusing for new users, becoming comfortable with a UNIX/Linux environment is very beneficial for you. The University generally expects you to produce codes/projects that will work on its Linux server. As well, Linux forces you to interact with the command line more, which is great if you want to learn more about how your computer works underneath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although Linux OS may be confusing for new users, becoming comfortable with a UNIX/Linux environment is very beneficial for you. The University generally expects you to produce code/projects that will work on its Linux server. As well, Linux forces you to interact with the command line more, which is great if you want to learn more about how your computer works underneath.
```

> Almost all Linux distros are free, especially the popular ones. As well, people have said that Linux takes up less storage and is more battery-efficient compared to Windows. Thus, the right Linux distro will significantly optimize your laptop, especially if you are on a budget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Almost all Linux distros are free, especially the popular ones. In general, Linux distros require less disk space and perform better on low-end devices, compared to Windows. This is great for your budget, and also for battery life. Thus, the right Linux distro will significantly optimize your laptop, especially if you are on a budget.
```

Reviewer 3: linux is not always better for battery life. Its actually general consensus that its worse than windows.

### MacOS

> Since the MacOS is a UNIX-based operating system, it is usually easier to set up local programming environment than Windows. As well, it is also among the most supported OS in terms of IT support and app availability. However, MacOS is generally not compatible with non-Apple products. This means that you would need to purchase a MacBook to use MacOS, which may be expensive/less cost-effective depending on your budget and what specifications you're looking for.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the MacOS is a UNIX operating system, it is usually easier to set up local programming environment than Windows. As well, it is also among the most supported OS in terms of IT support and app availability. However, MacOS is generally not compatible with non-Apple products. This means that you would need to purchase a MacBook to use MacOS, which may be expensive/less cost-effective depending on your budget and what specifications you're looking for.
```
